[GSoC 2020] - Closing blogpost (#3917)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2020/11/2020-11-03-gsoc-report.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Google Summer of Code 2020 summary"
tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2020
- jenkins
- community
- events
- mentor
author: oleg_nenashev

> description: This blogpost summarizes Google Summer of Code 

Reviewer: Trailing space could be removed.
```suggestion
description: This blogpost summarizes Google Summer of Code
```

---

With the mentor summit and the project retrospectives finished in October,
now we can call Google Summer of Code 2020 officially over in the Jenkins community.
On behalf of the Jenkins org team, we would like to thank all participants: students, mentors, applicants, and dozens of other contributors who participated in the project this year.
Google Summer of Code would not be successful without the active participation of the Jenkins community.

image:/images/gsoc/jenkins-gsoc-logo_small.png[Jenkins GSoC, role=center, float=right]

If you follow the Jenkins blog, you may have already seen link:/node/tags/gsoc2020/[many GSoC 2020 articles] created by the project teams.
Here I would like to focus on the key highlights from the project.

== Projects

In 2020 we had seven students working in the Jenkins mentoring organization.
We had 6 projects focused on Jenkins and one project focused on Jenkins X.
As usual, in GSoC we focused on problems important to the Jenkins users and community members.

> The projects delivered new highly anticipated new features and/or key architecture changes

Reviewer: Minor phrasing improvement.
```suggestion
The projects delivered highly anticipated new features and key architecture changes
```

needed for long-term evolution of Jenkins.

Here are the projects we had this year:

* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/custom-jenkins-distribution-build-service[Custom Jenkins distribution build service] by link:/blog/authors/sladyn98[Sladyn Nunes]
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/external-fingerprint-storage[External Fingerprint Storage] by link:/blog/authors/stellargo[Sumit Sarin]
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/git-plugin-performance[Git Plugin Performance Improvements] by link:/blog/authors/rishabhbudhouliya[Rishabh Budhouliya]

> * link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/github-checks[GitHub Checks API for Jenkins Plugins] by link:/blog/authors/XiongKezhi[Kezhi Xiong]

Reviewer: When I tried to click through the link running locally, XiongKezhi gave no results while xiongkezhi returned the expected pages
```suggestion
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/github-checks[GitHub Checks API for Jenkins Plugins] by link:/blog/authors/xiongkezhi[Kezhi Xiong]
```

Author: Works on jenkins.io, this was copied from the landing page

* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/jenkins-x-apps-consolidation[Jenkins X: Apps/Addons consolidation] by link:/blog/authors/nodece[Zixuan Liu]
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/machine-learning[Machine Learning Plugins for Data Science] by link:/blog/authors/loghijiaha[Loghi Perinpanayagam]
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/winsw-yaml-configs[Jenkins Windows Services: YAML Configuration Support] by link:/blog/authors/buddhikac96[Buddhika Chathuranga]

> Please refer to the project pages for more information and links to the blogposts and project demos.

Reviewer 2: `blogposts` should be `blog posts`

> Please refer to the project pages for more information and links to the blogposts and project demos.

Reviewer 2: `Please refer to the project pages for more information and links to the blogposts and project demos.` should be `Please refer to the project pages for more information, links to the blog posts, and project demos.

== Swag

All Google Summer of Code students and mentors get swag from Google.
This year, link:https://cd.foundation/[Contrinuos Delivery Foundation (CDF)] has sponsored swag for 50 most active GSoC participants:
all students, mentors, and many other contributors who participated and helped the projects to succeed.
This is the third year when the Jenkins organization sends extra GSoC swag,
In the previous years the swag logistics was one of the most challenging tasks for org admins during the entire project.
and we highly appreciate help from CDF with this part.
As DevOps World presenters, the students have also received special edition speaker swag from CloudBees.

image:/images/gsoc/2020/summary_report/swag.jpg[GSoC swag by the Jenkins project]

Thanks a lot to link:https://opensource.google/[Google], link:https://cd.foundation/[Contrinuos Delivery Foundation (CDF)] and link:https://www.cloudbees.com/[CloudBees]!

== Retrospective

After completion of the coding phases,

> org admins have reached out to all GSoC 2020 participants to gather their feedback and suggestions,
> and we also recommended project teams to hold their own retrospective meetings.

Reviewer: Good place to break the sentence into two sentences?
```suggestion
org admins have reached out to all GSoC 2020 participants to gather their feedback and suggestions.
We also recommended that project teams hold their own retrospective meetings.
```

Such information is instrumental to continuously improving GSoC in the Jenkins community.
We thank all contributors who shared their feedback!

The organization-wide retrospective was organized as a survey and a series of retrospective meetings.
You can find aggregated results in link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NIszUtuXmHiu8X2WrgAEQFK6aVodsmM4I0RSNRf4TS0/edit?usp=sharing[this Google Doc].

> Overall, we have got a very positive feedback from students and mentors.

Reviewer: MInor phrasing (optional)
```suggestion
Overall, we received very positive feedback from students and mentors.
```

> The GSoC framework in Jenkins has matured a lot during the previous years,
> and we have invested a lot in creating guidelines and recommendations for all parties.
> This year these guidelines helped a lot because all the expectations were known in advance.
> As usual, there is a lot to improve, especially with regards to the community bonding phases and cross-project communications.
> We are processing the feedback, and we will expand our documentation and the contributor onboarding plans next year.

Reviewer: Minor phrasing changes (optional)
```suggestion
The GSoC framework in Jenkins has matured significantly during the previous years.
The effort we invested to create guidelines and recommendations for all parties helped a lot because all the expectations were known in advance.
As usual, there is much to improve, especially with regards to the community bonding phases and cross-project communications.
We are processing the feedback, and we will expand our documentation and the contributor onboarding plans next year.
```

== Some personal notes

I have been involved in leading and coordinating Google Summer of Code in open source projects since 2016.
This year I visited the GSoC stand at FOSDEM and met a few organizers and former students.
A few days after, I proposed participating in GSoC at the Jenkins contributor summit in Brussels,
and several contributors supported this idea.
we spent several hours to create the first Jenkins GSoC page and brainstorm on project ideas.
We submitted our application, and we got accepted.
Thanks a lot to the Google team that gave us a chance!

It is great to work with the students and see how they explore the open source community and grow professionally as engineers.
It is also awesome to see how some of them stay in the project and keep contributing,

> including becoming plugin maintainers and GSoC mentors

Reviewer: End of sentence?
```suggestion
including becoming plugin maintainers and GSoC mentors.
```

But, for me, Google Summer of Code is not just about mentoring.
It also helps a lot with the community bonding... for the existing community like Jenkins which has a lot of isolated sub-communities in plugins.

> Many maintainers work alone, and it is not the best place.

Reviewer: Consider expanding "not the best place" with more specific information about the loneliness of open source development for many developers.
```suggestion
Many maintainers work alone, and it can be quite lonely working to maintain a plugin without feedback, developer ideas, and user interactions.
```

When plugin contributors become project mentors, they join the wider community effort and work in teams.
In many cases they start contributing to the organization-wide activities and goals,
and it grows the "backbone" of the Jenkins community.
Like other community-driven projects, we need such backbone to scale the community and onboard more contributors to the countless Jenkins components.

> So far it works really well, and GSoC excels among outreach programs with these regards.

Reviewer: Minor phrasing change
```suggestion
So far it works really well and GSoC excels among outreach programs in this regard.
```

// TODO:Move more notes from the draft

I would like to thank the Google Open Source team, students and all Jenkins community members for the great Google Summer of Code this year.

> We also thank Continuous Deliver

Reviewer: Expand the description of the value provided by CDF?
```suggestion
We also thank the Continuous Delivery Foundation for their help to recognize contributors and allow organization administrators to focus on projects.
```

Last but not least, I would like to thank the Jenkins org admin team:
link:/blog/authors/martinda[Martin d'Anjou],
link:/blog/authors/markyjackson-taulia[Marky Jackson], and
link:/blog/authors/marckk/[Kara de la Marck].
This was a crazy year for everyone. Regardless of that, the org admins stepped up and took responsibility for students and mentors involved in the project, with a serious time commitment.
Not all work by the organizers is publicly visible (applications, project selection, resolving conflicts),
but this work is essential to the project's success.
Thanks a lot to org admins and mentors who helped with the administrative tasks this year!

== So, what about GSoC 2021?

> Yes, we are interested to participate in Google Summer of Code 2021.

Reviewer: Not sure if "want to participate" or "plan to participate" express your intent.  (optional)
```suggestion
Yes, we plan to participate in Google Summer of Code 2021.
```

> The application period for organizations will start only in a few months,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application period for organizations will start in a few months,
```

> but we have already started preparing to the next GSoC session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but we have already started preparing for the next GSoC session.
```

We are looking for mentors, org admins and project ideas.
Please link:/project/gsoc#contacts[contact us] if you are interested!

* link:./2021/project-ideas[GSoC 2021 project ideas]
* link:/projects/gsoc/proposing-project-ideas[HOWTO: Propose a project idea]
* link:/projects/gsoc/mentors[Information for mentors]: guidelines and expectations

We invite potential students to start exploring the project and the available project ideas.

> Original ideas are always welcome in the project, and starting early is a great opportunity to 

Reviewer: Trailing space could be removed.
```suggestion
Original ideas are always welcome in the project, and starting early is a great opportunity to
```

get introduced to the Jenkins community, collect more information about the problem areas,

> and to come up with a good proposal.

Reviewer: Simpler verb rather than a phrasal verb?
```suggestion
and to create a good proposal.
```
